Updated SBOM guide (#498)
AlmaLinux/wiki: docs/documentation/sbom-guide.md

title: "User Guide: AlmaLinux *Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)*"
---

###### Last updated: 2024-09-16

# AlmaLinux SBOM User Guide 

## About *SBOM*

*SBOM (Software Bill of Materials)* is a list of all open-source and third-party components used in a codebase, along with their licensing information, version numbers, and any known vulnerabilities. 

[AlmaLinux Build System](https://github.com/AlmaLinux/build-system) has implemented *SBOM* into its pipeline for security purposes, such as tracing the build process, ensuring that only trusted sources are used, and reducing the risk of data corruption. 

## About immudb

> The Codenotary [immudb](https://docs.immudb.io/master/immudb.html#what-is-immudb) database is integrated with AlmaLinux to ensure data integrity and provide a chain of trust and traceability. Each stage of the build process goes through authentication and notarization. 

Reviewer: `... immudb databse is integrated with AlmaLinux` sounds weird to me. I'd say, and as a continuation of the previous sentence: `The AlmaLinux SBOM data is stored in Codenotary's immudb, which ensures data integrity and ...`

> AlmaLinux OS Team has developed SBOM data management [utility](https://github.com/AlmaLinux/alma-sbom) that generates SBOM records and allows users to track a package to verify if it is notarized and trusted.

Reviewer: I suggest: `... has developed [alma-sbom](https://github.com/AlmaLinux/alma-sbom), the SBOM data management utility for AlmaLinux, that generates ...`

## Working with *SBOM* 

### Get the AlmaLinux SBOM tool

> To access the immudb SBOM information for AlmaLinux you need an internet connection as records are stored in the AlmaLinux `git` repository.

Reviewer: How about something like: `To access the SBOM information for AlmaLinux, you need an internet connection to retrieve the records from our AlmaLinux immudb instance.`

You also need to install the AlmaLinux SBOM tool:
* Clone the [alma-sbom](https://github.com/AlmaLinux/alma-sbom) repository. 
* Navigate to *alma-sbom* directory.
* Create a Python Virtual Environment:
  ```
  python3.9 -m venv env
  ```
* Activate the Virtual Environment:
  ```
  source env/bin/activate
  ```
* Install dependencies:  
  ```
  pip install .
  ```

>   Among installed dependencies there's [immudb-wrapper](https://github.com/AlmaLinux/immudb-wrapper) that is used to get SBOM information based on the rpm package hash.

Reviewer: maybe something like: `there's immudb-wrapper, that is used to interact with our immudb database to save or get SBOM information`

            "SPDXID": "SPDXRef-0",
            "annotations": [
                {
                    "annotationDate": "2024-09-13T12:43:11Z",
                    "annotationType": "OTHER",
                    "annotator": "Tool: alma-sbom 0.0.2",
                    "comment": "almalinux:package:epoch=1"
                },
                ...
                { 
                    "annotationDate": "2024-09-13T12:43:11Z",
                    "annotationType": "OTHER",
                    "annotator": "Tool: alma-sbom 0.0.2",
                    "comment":  "almalinux:sbom:immudbHash=f8e2a823ffc9fe9311dac3e3a50c349c3a0689b951656fefa955cd4405ddf510" 
                    # this is the cryptographic hash stored in immudb
                },
```
:::

## Contribute

If you have a question, want to file a bug, please, create an [issue](https://github.com/AlmaLinux/alma-sbom/issues) and reach out to us trough the [SIG/Build System ](https://chat.almalinux.org/almalinux/channels/build-system) chat channel.

Interested in contributing to the project?
* Fork the [repository](https://github.com/AlmaLinux/alma-sbom).
* Create a new feature branch.
* Write your change.
* Submit a pull request.

> * The AlmaLinux Team will appreciate and review your contribution! 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The SIG members will appreciate and review your contribution! 
```

## About immudb

The AlmaLinux SBOM data is stored in Codenotary's [immudb](https://docs.immudb.io/master/immudb.html#what-is-immudb), which ensures data integrity and provides a chain of trust and traceability. Each stage of the build process goes through authentication and notarization. 

> AlmaLinux OS Team has developed has developed [alma-sbom](https://github.com/AlmaLinux/alma-sbom), the SBOM data management utility for AlmaLinux, that generates SBOM records and allows users to track a package to verify if it is notarized and trusted.

Reviewer: `has developed` is duplicated
